# Why You Should Watch Formula 1

I've watched sports all my life. I grew up watching Joe Mauer and Justin Morneau
define the Minnesota Twins' "M&M" era. The newly-constructed Target Field
brimmed with excitement that was definitively stamped out by the New York
Yankees in 2009, then again in 2010.

These days the team I follow the most is the Minnesota Vikings. My heart's been
broken by the Philadelphia Eagles destroying us a mere week after the
[Minneapolis Miracle](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJzpoj_NxqQ) made the 2017
postseason run seem predestined. And even more recently I watched Sam Darnold's
magic evaporate in a matter of two weeks.

![](/minneapolis-miracle.jpeg) _The Minneapolis Miracle, 2017. Thank you Stefon
Diggs_

That's not what this is about. I've been following sports all my life. I love
sports. This isn't about me. This is about you.

I don't know anything about you, but hopefully one of these reasons convinces
you to at least turn on a race or read an article this year.

## To Start

I got into Formula 1 very recently. I distinctly remember asking some of my
college friends why they were getting up so early for a race because I just
didn't get the appeal. Even before then I couldn't understand that one of my
high school classmate's go-karting career was a relatively serious endeavor. Ah
well, can't go back.

In the spring of 2023 I caught COVID. What better use of recovery time than to
binge watch a show? I can't remember how I picked Drive to Survive, but I did. A
couple months later and I was through the whole series and totally hooked. I
started watching races. Then I started watching qualifyings too, then the rest
was history.

Without further ado, here are 10 reasons you should watch Formula 1

## The Reasons:

### 1. You Like Cars

This is a pretty easy one to see. If you like cars, you're going to enjoy the
pinnacle of cars going fast. While F1 doesn't get to claim that it hits the
fastest top speeds in racing[^1], its combination of speed, tight corners, and
track variance among others, makes it the standard for motor racing. Drivers are
consistently pulling over 5 G's in the normal operation of the car

For the technologically inclined, you can dig into all the advancements that
come out of F1. Like the controversial
[active suspension](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Williams_FW15C) developed by
Williams in the 90's, or the controversial
["Dual-Axis Steering" (DAS)](https://www.planetf1.com/features/das-exploring-mercedes-banned-innovation)
developed by Mercedes in 2020, or even the controversial
[mini-DRS](https://www.planetf1.com/features/new-mclaren-mini-drs-data-reveals-true-impact-mcl38-performance)
developed by McLaren last season in 2024. The reward for innovation is truly
~~the joy of innovating itself~~ getting banned.

If I'm being honest, the most I feel this one myself is gawking at all the fancy
cars the drivers themselves drive for their personal vehicles[^2].

![](/charles-leclerc-road-car.png) _Apparently driving for Ferrari doesn't get
you any free cars, just the privilege of buying one_

[^1]:
    That would belong to INDYCAR, as long as we exclude drag racing or general
    land speed records or, frankly, air racing, all of which made googling this
    particular stat very confusing

[^2]:
    Like Carlos Sainz, who upgraded from his
    [famously "common-man" Volkswagen Golf](https://www.drive.com.au/caradvice/vw-golf-carlos-sainz-kate-middleton-princess-diana/)
    to a
    [one of 599 Ferrari SP3](https://www.reddit.com/r/formula1/comments/1hhemsb/carlos_sainzs_new_ferrari_daytona_sp3/)

### 2. You're Not Looking for Too Much

I was worried when I first started watching F1. I'm a chronically busy person,
and adding another thing to my plate really wasn't something I was looking to
do. Thankfully, F1 is a really easy sport to keep up with. In the NFL if you
miss a weekend, you can miss up to 16 hours of game action[^3]. Not to mention
that each of the 32 teams have 53 roster spots, so tracking the entire sport is
some 1700 players. Even leaving just the 22 starters[^4] that's still 700
players to keep track of.

That's not the case in F1. On a given race weekend you miss an hour of
qualifying, and two hours of the race, and that's it[^5]. If you really care
about the highlights, there's maybe 15 minutes of that total, and in the end you
can just look at the finishing order and move on.

To complete the football comparison. There are only twenty drivers total in F1.
That's it. You can memorize all the faces and names in the whole sport almost
without trying.

I've really enjoyed how elastic F1 is to my availability, but stay with me,
there's still some enjoyment to watching the sport itself.

[^3]:
    32 teams play a combined 16 games Thursday through Monday, with each game
    having at least an hour of game time

[^4]:
    11 on offense and 11 on defense, we don't have to
    [account for Travis Hunter](https://www.espn.com/college-football/story/_/id/41752213/travis-hunter-notable-two-way-college-football-players)
    just yet

[^5]: Barring a sprint race but that's only a few weekends out of the year

### 3. You Like when Things Go Wrong

This one is for my sister, who is one of the many people whose favorite part of
hockey is when they stop smacking a puck around and drop the gloves[^6].

When cars are driven fast, we humans tend to crash them. Formula 1 is no
exception. There is obviously potential severe consequence to an F1 crash, but
this section is about the kind that don't go "that" far.

![](/perez-crash.jpg) _I really liked when in this past season, even Sergio
Perez' car folded on his season_

Crashes are pretty routine in F1. One of my favorite things to keep track of
during the season is the
[World Destructor's Championship](https://www.reddit.com/r/formula1/comments/1hajvoq/world_destructors_championship_2024_finale/),
an estimate for how much crashes have cost for teams and drivers. The trophy is
awarded to the most expensive driver and team respectively[^7].

Crashes are some of the most consequential and engaging events in an F1 season.
You've really got to see them to appreciate how spectacular they can be. A few
quick googles can show you why F1 crashes are often the
[benchmark for the highest levels of G-Force ever experienced by humans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G-force#Typical_examples).

[^6]:
    Hey Emily, did you see the
    [USA vs Canada fights](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pUa6c7DNmQY)?

[^7]: Finally, Sergio Perez won something in 2024

### 4. You Are Really Good at Bedrotting

I really want to be a morning person. College killed any chance of that
happening for four years, but once I escaped the world of chronic sleepiness, I
saw an opportunity.

Fighting the bedrot was what transitioned me from checking on the results after
the fact to watching the race most weekends. F1 qualifying (usually) takes place
on Saturdays, and the main race on Sundays. Since the races take place all over
the world, the start times aren't always the most convenient for American
audiences.

Knowing myself, it's really difficult to get out of bed when the morning is
entirely free, but I'll always be on time (if not early) for a scheduled event.
I didn't want to commit to something big where I'd have to leave the house. I
wanted something to get me out of bed where I could enjoy a cup of coffee as I
wake up and enjoy the start of the day.

The European leg of the F1 calendar provided this at just the right time. Races
would start at 9 or 10 AM, and there I would be, tuned in on my couch.

This helped me establish a new habit in my life: getting up at a reasonable hour
on the weekends. I feel a lot better about myself when I can get going for the
day, even if it's for a leisure activity.

### 5. You Are Bad at Geography

If you pressed me on it, I couldn't have pointed out Bahrain on a map before F1.

Let me be clear, the geography one learns from paying attention to F1 suffers
from a strong European bias. Formula 1 still doesn't have a race in Africa, and
is just the Brazilian race away from excluding all of South America too. The F1
calendar is also one of the many indicators you can see of the monetary
influences playing out in global sport[^8].

With that said, it's been cool to be introduced to a bunch of different parts of
the world by watching drivers speed down their tracks or converted streets.

[^8]: See also: LIV Golf, NBA Cup

### 6. You Enjoy Reality Television

I could never really get into reality TV. I've enjoyed watching Singles Inferno
with friends, and I once put on an event to watch the Bachelor as an RA in
college, but I never find myself watching it on my own.

There's just something about these immensely talented twenty-somethings being
thrust at the focal point of a multi-million dollar organization that
intensifies all the interpersonal interactions.

The grid is small enough that you could fit all twenty drivers into a group
chat[^9]. Drivers can start nipping at each other over anything on or off track.
Each team only having two drivers is ripe circumstance to flip a prospective
buddy-buddy relationship to a heated rivalry[^10].

Following all the little slights and big fights is certainly a compelling way to
follow the season's action. Last year featured Max Verstappen beefing with
everybody around him on track. We'll see what this year has in store soon enough
but it's sure to be an entertaining one

![](/max-helmut.jpg) _Max Verstappen, seen here with the actual messiest member
of F1, Helmut Marko_

[^9]:
    Apparently it's
    [on WhatsApp as of 2022](https://www.reddit.com/r/formula1/comments/x6hghq/bottas_confirms_there_is_a_group_chat_between_the/)

[^10]: See: Lando Norris v Daniel Ricciardo 2021

### 7. You Enjoy Fanfiction

Let's call this one... the opposite of the point before[^11].

It was brought to my attention that there are several fanfictions written in the
Formula 1 universe. There are 5 as of writing that have eclipsed 500,000 words
each on AO3. I haven't read any of them, and I don't intend to, but if that's
your cup of tea, there's plenty of material to dive into, I guess[^12].

[^11]: Or maybe the continuation?
[^12]:
    The further reading on this section is googling "brocedes." Any further
    digging you do is on you

### 8. You Hate American Sports Streaming Providers

It's been 7 years since I lived in Minnesota, and I still yearn for a day when I
can pay a reasonable price to watch every Vikings game online for a given
season.

The NFL has deals with NBC, CBS, Fox, Amazon Prime, and even streamed their
crown jewel Super Bowl on Tubi for some reason. They have their own separate
streaming service, NFL+, and air games on YouTubeTV as well. Figuring out how to
catch a game is a nightmare. And it figures to get worse, recently
[Netflix is angling to get an even bigger chunk of the pie for the coming seasons](https://www.nbcsports.com/nfl/profootballtalk/rumor-mill/news/netflix-wants-a-sunday-afternoon-nfl-package).

F1 is a dream by comparison (at least for now). F1 TV costs less than $100 for
the whole year, and you can stream everything during the event, or after the
fact. This includes practices, qualifying, sprint races, and the Grands Prix
themselves. This enables 6 devices, so after sharing with a friend, my cost to
watch is around $2 per race weekend. I'll take that every time.

It figures that as F1 grows more in the United States that this may change as
more lucrative streaming setups/pricing plans develop, but for the time being it
really is one of the more accessible sports packages.

### 9. You Like Spending Money

To counter the point above, if you've really got a hole burning in your pocket,
Formula 1 will gladly take it from you.

There are boundless ways to spend your money on F1. There's plenty of team
merchandise, driver merchandise, or
[Peanuts-branded race merchandise](https://www.instagram.com/f1lasvegas/p/DBrQKXANczF/?hl=en&img_index=1)
[^13] that you can purchase. And that's all without going to a single race!

A weekend-long race ticket can range from ~€140 for a 3 day pass to the Suzuka
Grand Prix this year, to nearly $2000 to get in the door for the Las Vegas Grand
Prix. All to stay in a city for certainly its most expensive weekend of the
year[^14].

![](/monaco-gp.jpg) _The Monaco GP is consistently the most opulent display of
wealth, and frankly boring display of F1 racing_

Or maybe you even have a cool few million dollars sitting around, and you're
just looking to hang out around other people who also buy expensive cars. My
question to you would be, how are you just finding this now? And why are you
reading this?

[^13]: Don't ask I'm fine I'm fine I'm fine I'm fine
[^14]: My Monaco GP dreams will certainly have to wait a bit

### 10. You Want to Hang Out

At the end of the day, as it always is for me, F1 is just another means to
connect with people you either care about already, or want to care about more.
When I started watching live races, I was going over to a couples' very nice
house to take in the morning, ask questions, and sip their coffee.

Watching a race with friends is an exceptional opportunity to show your
hospitality, and to give your time together a little excitement as you catch up
with one another. I love having my friends over to watch a race, even if we
spend it answering all their questions about a potentially foreign sport.

So if you ever find yourself in Pittsburgh (or wherever I am) on a race morning,
hit me up and come over! I'll make you some coffee and we can take it all in.
